Emeryville City Council Debates Monthly Meeting Proposal, Kaur Sworn in as Mayor
December 3, 2025
by
Rob Arias
 
 4 mins read
The Emeryville City Council met for the last time of 2025 on Tuesday, December 2nd. Highlights from the meeting included a special meeting to discuss the possibility of shifting to a monthly meeting schedule and the city’s annual leadership rotation.

Council Debates Shift to Monthly Meeting [51:20]
The evening opened with a Special Meeting and study session examining whether Emeryville should reduce its two-meeting-per-month schedule to one.

Discussion of the item was suggested by Vice Mayor Sukhdeep Kaur and inspired by the southern California City of La Palma that, like Emeryville, is small with a population under 20,000. Kaur noted that La Palma has been adhering to the monthly meeting schedule “successfully” for the past 5 years. The item was brought to council at the recommendation of the budget and governance committee.

Finance Director Sharon Friedrichsen walked through how ten comparably sized cities handle their legislative calendars, noting that five of these cities met twice a month, four met only once a month and one met three times a month. Complexity of jurisdiction and operational needs were the primary criteria that dictated scheduling cadence.

Friedrichsen detailed that reduced staff time, cost and efficiency were the primary advantages of shifting to a monthly schedule. She cautioned that a one-meeting model could create longer meetings, delay ordinances, contracts and development agreements, adding that it would also mean ‘less public comment opportunity.’ It might also inadvertently lead to more frequent Special meetings to address emergency issues that arose.

Following the staff presentation, Councilmembers weighed in on with their thoughts on the pros and cons.

Priforce: “Democracy Is Not Supposed to Be Efficient”
Councilmember Priforce spoke in length about the issue. “Democracy is not supposed to be efficient,” Priforce read during an expansive nearly 8 minute commentary on the item. “It’s supposed to be accessible,” adding that reducing meetings would amplify an imbalance between residents with the free time to attend meetings and those without. “Every time we shrink the public square we shrink the ability of residents and everyone else to be heard in their own city.”

Councilmember Welch noted that staff already periodically canceled meetings when agendas were light giving them the flexibility to meet only one time per month when warranted. She warned that a once-monthly schedule would create more last-minute special meetings — actually increasing unpredictability for busy residents.

Kaur defended the proposed change saying the intention was to increase public engagement by balancing council meetings with committee work. But she acknowledged the consensus: “If a majority of the council feels this is not a good idea… I’m glad this has been very robustly discussed.”

Mayor David Mourra echoed the lack of identifiable benefit: “I’m a big fan of efficiency, but I was struggling to actually find the efficiency in this.”

Mourra did support Kaur’s suggestion of giving the Budget and Governance committee more agency to increase the cadence of their meeting schedule during active budget cycle discussions. “I would be fine putting that on a future agenda item for us to review the calendar and have make any adjustments as necessary for us to.”

The Special Meeting adjourned at 7:00 p.m.

Regular Meeting: Investment Policy Scrutinized [1:20]
The Regular Meeting opened with announcements about the cancellation of the December 16 council meeting and upcoming seasonal events including the annual parade and tree lighting on Friday, December 5.

The consent calendar contained nine items including the approval of action minutes from several past meetings and other budgetary authorizations including approximately $244,000 for three new, equipped police cruisers and $290,000 from the ECCL fund balance for the installation of security camera upgrades.

Councilmember Priforce made a motion to pull item 9.7 which was a resolution for “Adopting the Annual Statement of Investment Policy” for discussion. This motion was seconded and approved by the other members of council.

Priforce questioned whether the city’s investment guidelines incorporated ethical screening, asking whether they excluded financial institutions linked to “harmful industries.”

Friedrichsen confirmed that Emeryville already follows a Socially Responsible Investing (SRI) framework addressing fossil fuels, weaponry, labor practices and environmental compliance.

Chandler Investments Portfolio manager Karl Meng was brought online to answer questions adding that Emeryville’s policy is stricter than most: “Emeryville is kind of a step above and more restrictive in that realm.”

After providing these clarifications, the policy was unanimously approved.

